Hence, home, you idle creatures, get you home.
Is this a holiday?
What, know you not you ought not walk
upon a laboring day without the sign of your profession?
Speak.
What trade art thou?
Why, sir, a carpenter.
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
You, sir, what trade are you?
Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman,
I am but, as you would say, a cobbler.
But what trade art thou?
Answer me directly.
A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a safe conscience,
which is indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
What trade, thou knave?
Thou naughty knave, what trade?
I beseech you, sir, be not out with me;
yet, if you be out, sir, I can mend you.
What mean'st thou by that?
Mend me, thou saucy fellow!
Why, sir, cobble you.
Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
Truly, Sir, all that I live by is with the awl;
I meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's matters,
but with awl.
I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes;
when they're in great danger, I recover them.
as proper men as ever trod upon neat's leather
have gone upon my handiwork.
But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes
to get myself into more work.
But indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar
and to rejoice in his triumph.
Caesar! Caesar!
Wherefore rejoice?
What conquest brings he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome
to grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
knew you not Pompey?
Many a time and oft have you climb'd up to walls
and battlements, to towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
your infants in your arms,
and there have sat the livelong day in patient expectation
to see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
and when you saw his chariot but appear,
have you not made an universal shout
that Tiber trembled underneath her banks
to hear the replication of your sounds
made in her concave shores?
and do you now put on your best attire?
and do you now cull out a holiday?
and do you now strew flowers in his way
that comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?
Be gone!
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
pray to the gods to intermit the plague
that needs must light on this ingratitude.
Go, go, good countrymen.
For this fault, assemble all the poor men of your sort,
draw them to Tiber banks,
and weep your tears into the channel,
till the lowest stream do kiss the most exalted shore of all.
See whether their basest metal be not moved;
They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
Go you down that way towards the Capitol;
this way will I.
Disrobe the images if you do find them
deck'd with ceremonies.
May we do so?
You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
It is no matter; let no images be hung with Caesar's trophies.
I'll about and drive away the vulgar from the streets;
so do you too, where you perceive them thick.
These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing
will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
who else would soar above the view of men
and keep us all in servile fearfulness.
Hail, Caesar!
Caesar!
Peace, ho!
Caesar speaks.
Calpurnia.
Here, my lord.
Stand you directly in Antonio's way,
when he doth run his course.
Antonios.
Caesar, my lord?
Forget not in your speed, Antonio, to touch Calpurnia,
for our elders say the barren, touched in this holy chase,
shake off their sterile curse.
I shall remember.
When Caesar says "Do this," it is perform'd.
Set on, and leave no ceremony out.
Caesar!
Haaaaaaaaa!
Bid every noise be still!
Peace yet again!
Who is it in the press that calls on me?
I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music, cry "Caesar."
Speak; Caesar is turn'd to hear.
Beware the ides of March!
What man is that?
A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.
Set him before me; let me see his face.
Fellow, come from the throng.
Look upon Caesar.
What say'st thou to me now?
Speak once again.
Beware the ides of March.
He is a dreamer; let us leave him.
Pass.
Will you go see the order of the course?
Not I.
I pray you, do.
I am not gamesome; I do lack some part
of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires; I'll leave you.
Brutus, I do observe you now of late;
I have not from your eyes that gentleness and show of love
as I was wont to have.
You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
over your friend that loves you.
Cassius, be not deceived; if I have veil'd my look,
I turn the trouble of my countenance merely upon myself.
Vexed I am of late with passions of some difference,
conceptions only proper to myself,
which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors;
but let not therefore my good friends be grieved--
among which number, Cassius, be you one--
nor construe any further my neglect than that poor Brutus
with himself at war forgets the shows of love to other men.
Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,
by means whereof this breast of mine
hath buried thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?
No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself but by reflection,
by some other things.
'Tis just, and it is very much lamented, Brutus,
that you have no such mirrors
as will turn your hidden worthiness into your eye
that you may see your shadow.
I have heard where many of the best respect in Rome,
except immortal Caesar,
speaking of Brutus and groaning underneath this age's yoke,
have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.
Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
that you would have me seek into myself
for that which is not in me?
Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear,
and since you know you cannot see yourself
so well as by reflection,
I your glass will modestly discover to yourself
that of yourself which you yet know not of.
and be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus;
were I a common laugther,
or did use to stale with ordinary oaths
my love to every new protester,
if you know that I do fawn on men and hug them hard
and after scandal them,
or if you know that I profess myself
in banqueting to all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
What means this shouting?
I do fear the people choose Caesar for their king.
Ay, do you fear it?
Then must I think you would not have it so.
I would not, Cassius, yet I love him well.
Wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it that you would impart to me?
If it be aught toward the general good,
set honor in one eye and death in the other
and I will look on both indifferently.
Let the gods so speed me as I do love the name of honor
more than I fear death.
I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
as well as I do know your outward favor.
Well, honor is the subject of my story.
I cannot tell what you and other men think of this life,
but, for my single self, I had as lief not be
as live to be in awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was born free as Caesar; so were you;
we both have fed as well,
and we can both endure the winter's cold as well as he.
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
the troubled Tiber chafing with her shores, Caesar said to me,
"Darest thou, Cassius, now Leap in with me into this angry flood
and swim to yonder point?"
Upon the word, accoutred as I was,
I plunged in and bade him follow.
So indeed he did.
The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it with lusty sinews,
throwing it aside and stemming it with hearts of controversy.
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
Caesar cried, "Help me, Cassius, or I sink!"
I, as Aeneas our great ancestor did from the flames of Troy
upon his shoulder The old Anchises bear,
so from the waves of Tiber did I the tired Caesar.
And this man is now become a god,
and Cassius is a wretched creature and must bend his body
if Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
and when the fit was on him, I did mark how he did shake.
And 'Tis true, this god did shake;
His coward lips did from their color fly,
and that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
did lose his luster.
I did hear him groan.
Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans mark him
and write his speeches in their books,
alas, it cried, "Give me some drink, Titinius,"
as a sick girl.
Ye gods, it doth amaze me a man of such a feeble temper
should so get the start of the majestic world
and bear the palm alone.
Another general shout.
I do believe that these applauses
are for some new honors that are heap'd on Caesar.
Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world like a Colossus,
and we petty men walk under his huge legs and peep about
to find ourselves dishonorable graves.
Men at some time are masters of their fates:
the fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves that we are underlings.
Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that "Caesar"?
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
Weigh them, it is as heavy;
conjure with 'em, "Brutus" will start a spirit
as soon as "Caesar."
Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed
that he is grown so great?
Oh, Age, thou art shamed!
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
When went there by an age since the great flood
but it was famed with more than with one man?
When could they say till now that talk'd of Rome
that her wide walls encompass'd but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,
when there is in it but one only man.
You and I have heard our fathers say there was a Brutus once
who would have brook'd the eternal devil
to keep his state in Rome as easily as a king.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
What you would work me to, I have some aim.
How I have thought of this and of these times,
I shall recount hereafter; for this present, I would not,
so with love I might entreat you, be any further moved.
What you have said I will consider;
what you have to say I will with patience hear,
and find a time both meet to hear
and answer such high things.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
Brutus had rather be a villager
than to repute himself a son of Rome under these hard conditions
as this time is like to lay upon us.
I am glad that my weak words
have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.
The games are done, and Caesar is returning.
As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
and he will, after his sour fashion,
tell you what hath proceeded worthy note today.
I will do so.
But, look you, Cassius,
the angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow,
and all the rest look like a chidden train:
Calpurnia's cheek is pale,
and Cicero looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
as we have seen him in the Capitol,
being cross'd in conference by some senators.
Casca will tell us what the matter is.
Antonios.
Caesar?
Let me have men about me that are fat, sleek-headed men,
and such as sleep o' nights:
yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;
he thinks too much; such men are dangerous.
Fear him not, Caesar; he's not dangerous;
he's a noble Roman and well given.
Would he were fatter!
But I fear him not, yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid so soon
as that spare Cassius.
He reads much, he is a great observer,
and he looks quite through the deeds of men.
He loves no plays, as thou dost, Antony; he hears no music;
seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
as if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit
that could be moved to smile at anything.
Such men as he be never at heart's ease
whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
and therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd than what I fear,
for always I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
and tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
Would you speak with me?
Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanced today
that Caesar looks so sad.
Why, you were with him, were you not?
I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.
Why, there was a crown offered him, and being offered him,
he put it by with the back of his hand, thus,
and then the people fell ashouting.
What was the second noise for?
Why, for that too.
They shouted thrice.
What was the last cry for?
Why, for that too.
Was the crown offered him thrice?
Ay, marry, wast, and he put it by thrice,
every time gentler than other,
and at every putting by mine honest neighbors shouted.
Who offered him the crown?
Why, Antony.
Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
I can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it.
It was mere foolery; I did not mark it.
I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown,
yet 'twas not a crown neither; 'twas one of these coronets.
And, as I told you, he put it by once.
But for all that,
to my thinking, he would fain have had it.
Then he offered it to him again; then he put it by again.
But, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it.
And then he offered it the third time;
he put it the third time by;
and still as he refused it, the rabblement hooted
and clapped their chopped hands
and threw up their sweaty nightcaps
and uttered such a deal of stinking breath
because Caesar refused the crown
that it had almost choked Caesar,
for he swounded and fell down at it.
And for mine own part, I durst not laugh
for fear of opening my lips and receiving the bad air.
But, soft, I pray you, what, did Caesars wound?
He fell down in the marketplace
and foamed at mouth and was speechless.
'Tis very like.
He hath the falling sickness.
No, Caesar hath it not, but you and I and honest Casca,
we have the falling sickness.
I know not what you mean by that,
but I am sure Caesar fell down.
If the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him
according as he pleased and displeased them,
as they use to do the players in the theatre, I am no true man.
What said he when he came unto himself?
Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived
the common herd was glad he refused the crown,
he plucked me ope his doublet
and offered them his throat to cut.
And I'd been a man of any occupation,
if I had not taken him at a word,
I would I might go to hell among the rogues.
And so he fell.
And when he came to himself again,
he said, if he had done or said anything amiss,
he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity.
Three or four wenches where I stood cried, "Alas, good soul!"
and forgave him with all their hearts.
But there's no heed to be taken of them;
if Caesar had stabbed their mothers,
they would have done no less.
And after that he came, thus sad, away?
Ay.
Did Cicero say anything?
Ay, he spoke Greek.
To what effect?
Nay, an I tell you that,
I'll ne'er look you i' the face again;
but those that understood him smiled at one another
and shook their heads;
but for mine own part, it was Greek to me.
I could tell you more news too:
Marullus and Flavius,
for pulling scarfs off Caesar's images,
are put to silence.
Fare you well.
There was more foolery yet, if I could remember it.
Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?
No, I am promised forth.
Then will you dine with me tomorrow?
Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold,
and your dinner worth the eating.
Good, I will expect you.
Do so.
Farewell, both.
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be.
He was quick mettle when he went to school.
So is he now in execution of any bold or noble enterprise.
However, he puts on this tardy form.
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
which gives men stomach to digest his words
with better appetite.
And so it is.
For this time I will leave you.
Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
I will come home to you, or, if you will, come home to me
and I will wait for you.
I will do so.
Till then...think of the world.
Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet, I see thy honorable mettle
may be wrought from that it is disposed;
therefore it is meet that noble minds
keep ever with their likes;
For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius, he should not humor me.
I will this night, in several hands, in at his windows throw,
as if they came from several citizens, writings,
all tending to the great opinion that Rome holds of his name,
wherein obscurely Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at.
And after this let Caesar seat him sure;
for we will shake him, or worse days endure.
Good even, Casca.
Brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathless, and why stare you so?
Are not you moved, when all the sway of eart
shakes like a thing unfirm?
O Cicero, I have seen tempests
when the scolding winds have rived the knotty oaks,
and I have seen the ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
to be exalted with the threatening clouds,
but never till tonight, never till now,
did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
or else the world too saucy with the gods
incenses them to send destruction.
Why, saw you anything ore wonderful?
A common slave-- you know him well by sight--
held up his left hand,
which did flame and burn like twenty torches join'd,
and yet his hand not sensible of fire remain'd unscorch'd.
Besides, I ha' not since put up my sword.
Against the Capitol I met a lion, who glaz'd upon me
and went surly by without annoying me.
And there were drawn upon a heap a hundred ghastly women
transformed with their fear, who swore they saw men all in fire
walk up and down the streets.
And yesterday the bird of night did sit even at noonday
upon the marketplace, hooting and shrieking.
When these prodigies do so conjointly meet,
let not men say "These are their reasons; they are natural":
For I believe they are portentous things
unto the climate that they point upon.
Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time.
But men may construe things after their fashion,
clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?
He doth, for he did bid Antonios send word to you
he would be there tomorrow.
Goodbye then, Casca.
This disturbed sky is not to walk in.
Farewell, Cicero.
Who's there?
A Roman.
Casca, by your voice.
Your ear is good.
Cassius, what night is this!
A very pleasing night to honest men.
Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,
submitting me unto the perilous night,
and thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
have bared my bosom to the thunderstone;
and when the cross blue lightning
seem'd to open the breast of heaven,
I did present myself even in the aim and very flash of it.
But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
It is the part of men to fear and tremble
when the most mighty gods by tokens
send such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
You are dull, Casca,
and those sparks of life that should be in a Roman
you do want, or else you use not.
You look pale and gaze and put on fear
and cast yourself in wonder
to see the strange impatience of the heavens.
But if you would consider the true cause why all these fires,
why all these gliding ghosts,
why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
why old men, fools, and children calculate,
Why all these things change from their ordinance,
their natures, and preformed faculties to monstrous quality,
why, you shall find that heaven hath infused them
with these spirits to make them instruments of fear and warning
unto some monstrous state.
Now could I, Casca,
name to thee a man most like this dreadful night,
that thunders, lightens, opens graves,
and roars as doth the lion in the Capitol,
a man no mightier than thyself or me in personal action,
yet prodigious grown and fearful,
as these strange eruptions are.
'Tis Caesar that you mean, is it not, Cassius?
Let it be who it is,
for Romans now have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
But, woe the while!
Our fathers' minds are dead,
and we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits;
our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
Indeed they say the senators tomorrow
mean to establish Caesar as a king,
and he shall wear his crown by sea and land
in every place save here in Italy.
I know where I will wear this dagger then:
Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.
Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron
can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
but life, being weary of these worldly bars,
never lacks power to dismiss itself.
If I know this, know all the world besides,
that part of tyranny that I do bear
I can shake off at pleasure.
So can I.
So every bondman in his own hand
bears the power to cancel his captivity.
And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
Poor man.
I know he would not be a wolf
but that he sees the Romans are but sheep.
He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
begin it with weak straws.
What trash is Rome, what rubbish, and what offal,
when it serves for the base matter
to illuminate so vile a thing as Caesar?
Grief, where hast thou led me?
I perhaps speak this before a willing bondman;
then I know my answer must be made.
But I am arm'd, and dangers are to me indifferent.
You speak to Casca,
and to such a man that is no fleering tell-tale.
Hold my hand.
Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
and I will set this foot of mine
as far as who goes farthest.
Ay, there's a bargain made.
Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
to undergo with me an enterprise
of honorable, dangerous consequence;
and I do know by this, they stay for me in Pompey's Porch.
For now, this fearful night,
there is no stir or walking in the streets,
and the complexion of the element in favor's
like the work we have in hand,
most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.
Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait; he is a friend.
Cinna, where haste you so?
To find out you.
Who's that?
Metellus Cimber?
No, it is Casca, one incorporate to our attempts.
Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?
I am glad on't.
What a fearful night is this!
There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
Am I not stay'd for?
Tell me.
Yes, you are.
O Cassius, if you could but win the noble Brutus to our party--
Be you content.
Good Cinna, take this paper,
and look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
where Brutus may but find it; and throw this in at his window;
set this up with wax upon old Brutus' statue.
All this done, repair to Pompey's Porch,
where you shall find us.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
All but Metellus Cimber,
and he's gone to seek you at your house.
Well, I will hie and so bestow these papers as you bade me.
That done, repair to Pompey's Theatre.
Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day see Brutus at his house.
Three parts of him is ours already,
and the man entire on the next encounter yields him ours.
O, he sits high in all the people's hearts,
and that which would appear offense in us,
His countenance, like richest alchemy,
will change to virtue and to worthiness.
Him and his worth and our great need of him
you have right well conceited.
Let us go, for it is after midnight,
and ere day we will awake him and be sure of him.
What, Lucius, ho!
I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
give guess how near to day.
Lucius, I say!
I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
When, Lucius, when?
Awake, I say!
What, Lucius!
Call'd you, my lord?
Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.
When it is lighted, come and call me here.
I will, my lord.
It must be by his death, and, for my part,
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
but for the general.
He would be crown'd:
how that might change his nature, there's the question.
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder
and that craves wary walking.
Crown him that,
and then, I grant, we put a sting in him
that at his will he may do danger with.
The abuse of greatness is when it disjoins remorse from power,
and, to speak truth of Caesar,
I have not known when his affections
sway'd more than his reason.
But 'tis a common proof
that lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
but when he once attains the upmost round,
he then unto the ladder turns his back, looks in the clouds,
scorning the base degrees by which he did ascend.
So Caesar may; then, lest he may, prevent.
And, since the quarrel will bear no color for the thing he is,
fashion it thus, that what he is, augmented,
would run to these and these extremities;
and therefore think him as a serpent's egg
which hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous,
and kill him in the shell.
The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
Searching the window for a flint
I found this paper thus seal'd up,
and I am sure it did not lie there when I went to bed.
Get you to bed again, it is not day.
Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?
I know not, sir.
Look in the calendar and bring me word.
I will, sir.
"Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake and see thyself.
Shall Rome, et cetera.
Speak, strike, redress!"
"Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake."
Such instigations have been often dropp'd
where I have took them up.
"Shall Rome, et cetera."
Thus must I piece it out.
Shall Rome stand under one man's awe?
What, Rome?
My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
the Tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king.
"Speak, strike, redress."
Am I entreated to speak and strike?
O Rome, I make thee promise, if the redress will follow,
thou receivest thy full petition at the hand of Brutus!
Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.
'Tis good.
Go to the gate, somebody knocks.
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar I have not slept.
Between the acting of a dreadful thing and the first motion,
all the interim is like a phantasma or a hideous dream;
the genius and the mortal instruments are then in council,
and the state of man, like to a little kingdom,
suffers then the nature of an insurrection.
Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door,
who doth desire to see you.
Is he alone?
No, sir, there are more with him.
Do you know them?
No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,
and half their faces buried in their cloaks,
that by no means I may discover them by any mark of favor.
Let 'em enter.
They are the faction.
O Conspiracy, shamest thou
to show thy dangerous brow by night,
when evils are most free?
O, then, by day where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
to mask thy monstrous visage?
Seek none, Conspiracy; hide it in smiles and affability;
for if thou path, thy native semblance on,
not Erebus itself were dim enough to hide thee
from prevention.
I think we are too bold upon your rest.
Good morrow, Brutus, do we trouble you?
I have been up this hour, awake all night.
Know I these men that come along with you?
Yes, every man of them, and no man here but honors you,
and every one doth wish you had but that opinion of yourself
which every noble Roman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.
He is welcome hither.
This, Decius Brutus.
He is welcome too.
This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.
They are all welcome.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
betwixt your eyes and night?
Shall I entreat a word?
Here lies the east.
Doth not the day break here?
No.
O, pardon, sir, it doth,
and yon grey lines that fret the clouds are messengers of day.
You shall confess that you are both deceived.
Here, as I draw my sword, the sun arises,
which is a great way growing on the south,
weighing the youthful season of the year.
Some two months hence up higher toward the north
he first presents his fire,
and the high east stands as the Capitol, directly here.
Give me your hands all over, one by one.
And let us swear our resolution.
No, not an oath.
If not the face of men, the sufferance of our souls,
the time's abuse--
if these be motives weak,break off betimes,
and every man hence to his idle bed;
so let high-sighted tyranny range on
till each man drop by lottery.
But if these, as I am sure they do,
bear fire enough to kindle cowards
and to steel with valor the melting spirits of women,
then, countrymen, what need we any spur but our own cause
to prick us to redress?
What other bond than secret Romans that have spoke the word
and will not palter?
And what other oath than honesty to honesty engaged
that this shall be or we will fall for it?
Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
old feeble carrions
and such suffering souls that welcome wrongs;
unto bad causes swear such creatures as men doubt;
but do not stain the even virtue of our enterprise,
nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
to think that or our cause or our performance
did need an oath;
when every drop of blood that every Roman bears,
and nobly bears, is guilty of a several bastardy
if he do break the smallest particle of any promise
that hath pass'd from him.
But what of Cicero?
Shall we sound him?
I think he will stand very strong with us.
Oh, let us not leave him out.
No, by no means.
O, let us have him,
for his silver hairs will purchase us a good opinion,
and buy men's voices to commend our deeds.
It shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
but all be buried in his gravity.
O, name him not; let us not break with him,
for he will never follow anything that other men begin.
Then leave him out.
Indeed he is not fit.
Shall no man else be touch'd but only Caesar?
Decius, well urged.
I think it is not meet Mark Antony,
so well beloved of Caesar, should outlive Caesar.
We shall find of him a shrewd contriver;
and you know his means, if he improve them,
may well stretch so far as to annoy us all,
which to prevent, let Antony and Caesar fall together.
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
to cut the head off and then hack the limbs
like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
for Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
Let's be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
and in the spirit of men there is no blood.
O, that we then could come by Caesar's spirit,
and not dismember Caesar.
But, alas, Caesar must bleed for it.
And, gentle friends, let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds;
and let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
stir up their servants to an act of rage
and after seem to chide 'em.
This shall make our purpose necessary and not envious,
which so appearing to the common eyes,
we shall be call'd purgers, not murderers.
And for Mark Antony, think not of him,
for he can do no more
than Caesar's arm when Caesar's head is off.
Yet I fear him,
for in the ingrated love he bears to Caesar--
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him.
If he love Caesar, all that he can do is to himself,
take thought and die for Caesar.
And that were much he should,
for he is given to sports, to wildness, and much company.
There is no fear in him-- let him not die,
for he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
Peace, count the clock.
The clock hath stricken three.
'Tis time to part.
But it is doubtful yet
whether Caesar will come forth today or no,
for he is superstitious grown of late,
quite from the main opinion he held once of fantasy,
of dreams, and ceremonies.
It may be these apparent prodigies,
the unaccustom'd terror of this night,
and the persuasion of his augurers
may hold him from the Capitol today.
Never fear that.
If he be so resolved, I can o'ersway him,
for he loves to hear
that unicorns can be betray'd with trees,
and bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
lions with toils, and men with flatterers;
but when I tell him he hates flatterers,
he says he does, being then most flattered.
Let me work; for I can give his humor the true bent,
and I will bring him to the Capitol.
Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
By the eighth hour.
Is that the utter most?
Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.
I wonder none of you have thought of him.
Now, good Metellus, go along by him.
He loves me well, and I have given him reasons;
send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.
The morning comes upon us.
We'll leave you, Brutus, and, friends, disperse yourselves,
but all remember what you have said
and show yourselves true Romans.
Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily;
let not our looks put on our purposes,
but bear it as our Roman actors do,
with untired spirits and formal constancy.
And so, good morrow to you every one.
Boy.
Lucius.
Fast asleep?
It is no matter.
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber;
thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
which busy care draws in the brains of men;
therefore thou sleep'st so sound.
Brutus, my lord.
Portia, what mean you?
Wherefore rise you now?
It is not for your health thus to commit your weak condition
to the raw cold morning.
Nor for yours neither.
You have ungently, Brutus, stole from my bed;
and yesternight at supper you suddenly arose
and walk'd about, musing and sighing, with your arms across;
and when I ask'd you what the matter was,
you stared upon me with ungentle looks.
I urged you further; then you scratch'd your head,
and too impatiently stamp'd with your foot.
Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,
but with an angry wafture of your hand
gave sign for me to leave you.
So I did, fearing to strengthen that impatience
which seem'd too much enkindled,
and withal hoping it was but an effect of humor,
which sometime hath his hour with every man.
It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep,
and, could it work so much upon your shape
as it hath much prevail'd on your condition,
I should not know you, Brutus.
Dear my lord, make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
I am not well in health, and that is all.
Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
he would embrace the means to come by it.
Why, so I do.
Good Portia, go to bed.
Is Brutus sick, and is it physical to walk unbraced
and suck up the humors of the dank morning?
What, is Brutus sick,
and will he steal out of his wholesome bed
to dare the vile contagion of the night
and tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
to add unto his sickness?
No, my Brutus, you have some sick offense within your mind,
which by the right and virtue of my place I ought to know of;
and, upon my knees, I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
by all your vows of love
and that great vow which did incorporate and make us one,
that you unfold to me, yourself, your half,
why you are heavy and what men tonight have had resort to you;
for here have been some six or seven,
who did hide their faces even from darkness.
Kneel not, gentle Portia.
I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
is it excepted I should know no secrets that appertain to you?
Am I yourself but, as it were, in sort or limitation,
to keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
and talk to you sometimes?
Dwell I but in the suburbs of your good pleasure?
If it be no more, Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.
You are my true and honorable wife, as dear to me
as are the ruddy drops that visit my sad heart.
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
I grant I am a woman,
but withal a woman that Lord Brutus took to wife.
but withal a woman well reputed, Cato's daughter.
Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
being so father'd and so husbanded?
Tell me your counsels.
I will not disclose 'em.
I have made strong proof of my constancy,
giving myself a voluntary wound here in the thigh.
Can I bear that with patience and not my husband's secrets?
O ye gods, render me worthy of this noble wife!
Hark, hark, one knocks.
Portia, go in awhile,
and by and by thy bosom shall partake the secrets of my heart.
All my engagements I will construe to thee,
all the charactery of my sad brows.
Leave me with haste.
Lucius, who's that knocks?
Here is a sick man that would speak with you.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spoke of.
Boy, stand aside.
Caius Ligarius, how?
Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius, to wear a kerchief.
Would you were not sick.
I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
any exploit worthy the name of honor.
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
By all the gods that Romans bow before,
I here discard my sickness.
Soul of Rome.
Brave son, derived from honorable loins.
Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up my mortified spirit.
Now bid me run, and I will strive with things impossible,
yea, get the better of them.
What's to do?
A piece of work that will make sick men whole.
But are not some whole that we must make sick?
That must we also.
What it is, my Caius, I shall unfold to thee,
as we are going to whom it must be done.
Set on your foot, and with a heart new-fired I follow you,
to do I know not what;
but it sufficeth that Brutus leads me on.
Follow me then.
Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight.
Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,
"Help, ho, They murther Caesar."
Ho there.
My lord?
Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
and bring me their opinions of success.
I will, my lord.
What mean you, Caesar?
Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stir out of your house today.
Caesar shall forth:
the things that threaten'd me ne'er look'd but on my back;
when they shall see the face of Caesar, they are vanished.
Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,
yet now they fright me.
There is one within,
besides the things that we have heard and seen,
recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
A lioness hath whelped in the streets;
and graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead;
fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
in ranks and squadrons and right forms of war,
which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
the noise of battle hurtled in the air,
horses did neigh and dying men did groan,
and ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
O Caesar!
These things are beyond all use, and I do fear them.
What can be avoided whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth,
for these predictions are to the world in general as to Caesar.
When beggars die, there are no comets seen;
the heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
Cowards die many times before their deaths;
the valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
it seems to me most strange that men should fear
seeing that death, a necessary end,
will come when it will come.
What say the augurers?
They would not have you to stir forth today.
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
they could not find a heart within the beast.
The gods do this in shame of cowardice.
Caesar should be a beast without a heart
if he should stay at home today for fear.
No, Caesar shall not.
Danger knows full well
Caesar is more dangerous than he.
We are two lions litter'd in one day,
and I the elder and more terrible.
And Caesar shall go forth.
Alas, my lord, your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
Do not go forth today.
Call it my fear that keeps you in the house and not your own.
We'll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
and he shall say you are not well today.
Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
and, for thy humor, I will stay at home.
Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.
Caesar, all hail!
Good morrow, worthy Caesar!
I come to fetch you to the Senate House.
And you are come in very happy time
to bear my greeting to the senators
and tell them that I will not come today.
Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:
I will not come today; tell them so, Decius.
Say he is sick.
Shall Caesar send a lie?
Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far
to be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
Decius, tell them Caesar will not come.
Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.
The cause is in my will: I will not come.
That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
But, for your private satisfaction,
because I love you, I will let you know.
Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home;
she dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
did run pure blood, and many lusty Romans
came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
And these does she apply for warnings and portents
and evils imminent, and on her knee
hath begg'd that I will stay at home today.
This dream is all amiss interpreted;
it was a vision fair and fortunate.
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
in which so many smiling Romans bathed,
signifies that from you great Rome shall suck reviving blood,
and that great men shall press for tinctures, stains,
relics, and cognizance.
This by Calpurnia's dream is signified.
And this way have you well expounded it.
I have, when you have heard what I can say.
And know it now, the Senate have concluded
to give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,
their minds may change.
Besides, it were a mock apt to be render'd,
for someone to say "Break up the Senate till another time,
when Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams."
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper,
"Lo, Caesar is afraid"?
Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love to your proceeding
bids me tell you this, and reason to my love is liable.
How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia.
I am ashamed I did yield to them.
Give me my robe, for I will go.
And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
Good morrow, Caesar.
Welcome, Publius.
What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?
Good morrow, Casca.
Caius Ligarius, Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
as that same ague which hath made you lean.
What is't o'clock?
Caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
I thank you for your pains and courtesy.
See, Antony, that revels long o' nights, is notwithstanding up.
Good morrow, Antony.
So to most noble Caesar.
Bid them prepare within.
I am to blame to be thus waited for.
Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what, Trebonius,
I have an hour's talk in store for you;
remember that you call on me today;
be near me, that I may remember you.
Caesar, I will.
And so near will I be that your best friends
shall wish I had been further.
Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
and we like friends will straightway go together.
That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon.
"Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius;
"come not near Casca; have an eye to Cinna;
"trust not Trebonius; mark well Metellus Cimber;
"Decius Brutus loves thee not;
"thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius.
"There is but one mind in all these men,
"and it is bent against Caesar.
"If thou beest not immortal, look about you.
"Security gives way to conspiracy.
"The mighty gods defend thee.
Thy lover, Artemidorus."
Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
and as a suitor will I give him this.
My heart laments that virtue cannot live
out of the teeth of emulation.
If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
if not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.
I prithee, boy, run to the Senate House;
stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
Why dost thou stay?
To know my errand, madam.
I would have had thee there, and here again,
ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
O constancy, be strong upon my side!
Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue!
I have a man's mind, but a woman's might.
How hard it is for women to keep counsel.
Art thou here yet?
Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
And so return to you, and nothing else?
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
for he went sickly forth; and take good note
what Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
Hark, boy, what noise is that?
I hear none.
Prithee, listen well.
I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,
and the wind brings it from the Capitol.
Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.
Come hither, fellow; which way hast thou been?
At mine own house, good lady.
What is't o'clock?
About the ninth hour, lady.
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
Madam, not yet.
I go to take my stand to see him pass on to the Capitol.
Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?
That I have, lady.
If it will please Caesar to be so good to Caesar as to hear me,
I shall beseech him to befriend himself.
Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?
None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.
Good morrow to you.
Here the street is narrow,
the throng that follows Caesar on the heels of senators,
of praetors, common suitors,
will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
I'll get me to a place more void
and there speak to great Caesar as he comes along.
Ay me, how weak a thing the heart of woman is!
O Brutus, the heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
Sure, the boy heard me.
Brutus hath a suit that Caesar will not grant.
O, I grow faint.
Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord; say I am merry.
Come to me again, and bring me word what he doth say to thee.
The ides of March are come.
Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
Hail, Caesar!
Read this schedule.
Trebonius doth desire you to o'er read, at your best leisure,
this his most humble suit.
O Caesar, read mine first,
for mine's a suit that touches Caesar nearer.
Read it, great Caesar.
What touches us ourself shall be last served.
Delay not, Caesar; read it instantly.
What, is the fellow mad?
Sirrah, give place!
What, urge you your petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.
I wish your enterprise today may thrive.
What enterprise, Popilius?
Fare you well.
What said Popilius Lena?
He wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
I fear our purpose is discovered.
Look how he makes to Caesar; mark him.
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.
Brutus, what shall be done?
If this be known, Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
for I will slay myself.
Cassius, be constant.
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
for, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus,
he draws Mark Antony out of the way.
Where is Metellus Cimber?
Let him go and presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
He is address'd; press near and second him.
Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
What is now amiss that Caesar and his Senate must redress?
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat an humble heart.
I must prevent thee, Cimber.
These couchings and these lowly courtesies
might fire the blood of ordinary men
and turn preordinance and first decree into the law of children.
Be not fond to think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
that will be thaw'd from the true quality
with that which melteth fools.
I mean sweet words, low-crooked court'sies,
and base spaniel-fawning.
Thy brother by decree is banished.
If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
Know, Caesar doth not wrong,
nor without cause will he be satisfied.
Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
to sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
for the repealing of my banish'd brother?
I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
desiring thee that Publius Cimber
may have an immediate freedom of repeal.
What, Brutus?
Pardon, Caesar!
Caesar, pardon!
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
to beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
I could be well moved, if I were as you;
if I could pray to move, then prayers would move me;
but I am constant as the northern star,
of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
there is no fellow in the firmament.
The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks;
they are all fire and every one doth shine;
but there's but one in all doth hold his place.
So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
and men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
yet in the number I do know but one
that unassailable holds on his rank, unshaked of motion;
and that I am he, let me a little show it, even in this;
that I was constant Cimber should be banish'd,
and constant do remain to keep him so.
O Caesar--
Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
Great Caesar--
Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
Speak, hands, for me!
Et tu, Brute?
Then fall, Caesar.
Liberty!
Freedom!
Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets!
Some to the common pulpits,
cry out, "Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
People and senators, be not affrighted,
fly not, stand still; ambition's debt is paid.
Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
And Cassius too.
Where's Publius?
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
Stand fast together, lest some friend--
Talk not of standing.
Publius, good cheer, there is no harm intended to your person,
nor to no Roman else.
So tell them, Publius.
And leave us, Publius, lest the people rushing on us
should do your age some mischief.
Do so, and let no man abide this deed but we the doers.
Where is Antony?
Fled to his house amazed.
Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
as it were doomsday.
Fates, we will know your pleasures.
That we shall die, we know;
'tis but the time and drawing days out that men stand upon.
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
cuts off so many years of fearing death.
Grant that, and then is death a benefit;
so are we Caesar's friends
that have abridged his time of fearing death.
Stoop, Romans, stoop,
and let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
up to the elbows, and besmear our swords.
Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
and waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
Let's all cry, "Peace, freedom, and liberty!"
Stoop then, and wash.
How many ages hence shall this our lofty scene be acted over
in states unborn and accents yet unknown!
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
that now on Pompey's basis lies along no worthier than the dust.
So oft as that shall be,
so often shall the knot of us be call'd
the men that gave their country liberty.
What, shall we forth?
Ay, every man away.
Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
with the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
and, being prostrate,thus he bade me say:
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
Say I love Brutus and I honor him;
say I fear'd Caesar, honor'd him, and loved him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe
that Antony may safely come to him
and be resolved how Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
so well as Brutus living,
but will follow the fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
thorough the hazards of this untrod state
with all true faith.
So says my master Antony.
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
I never thought him worse.
Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
he shall be satisfied and, by my honor, depart untouch'd.
I'll fetch him presently.
I know that we shall have him well to friend.
I wish we may, but yet have I a mind that fears him much,
and my misgiving still falls shrewdly to the purpose.
Welcome, Mark Antony.
O mighty Caesar.
Dost thou lie so low?
Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
shrunk to this little measure?
Fare thee well.
I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
If I myself, there is no hour so fit as Caesar's death's hour,
nor no instrument of half that worth as those your swords,
made rich with the most noble blood of all this world.
I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
fulfill your pleasure.
Live a thousand years, I shall not find myself so apt to die;
no place will please me so, no means of death,
as here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
the choice and master spirits of this age.
O Antony, beg not your death of us.
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
as, by our hands and this our present act you see we do,
yet see you but our hands
and this the bleeding business they have done.
Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
and pity to the general wrong of Rome--
as fire drives out fire, so pity pity--
Hath done this deed on Caesar.
For your part, to you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony;
our arms in strength of malice,
and our hearts of brothers' temper,
do receive you in with all kind love,
good thoughts, and reverence.
Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
in the disposing of new dignities.
Only be patient till we have appeased the multitude,
beside themselves with fear,
and then we will deliver you the cause why I,
that did love Caesar when I struck him,
have thus proceeded.
I doubt not of your wisdom.
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
now, Decius Brutus, yours;
yours, good Metellus; yours, Cinna;
and, my valiant Casca, yours;
though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
Gentlemen all.
Alas, what shall I say?
My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
that one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
either a coward or a flatterer.
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true.
If then thy spirit look upon us now,
shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
to see thy Antony making his peace,
shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes, most noble,
in the presence of thy course?
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
it would become me better
than to close in terms of friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me, Julius.
Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,
here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,
sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy Lethe.
and this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
How like a deer strucken by many princes dost thou here lie.
Mark Antony--
Pardon me, Caius Cassius.
The enemies of Caesar shall say this:
then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
but what compact mean you to have with us?
Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
or shall we on, and not depend on you?
Therefore I took your hand,
but was indeed sway'd from the point by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all and love you all,
upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
Or else were this a savage spectacle.
Our reasons are so full of good regard that were you, Antony,
the son of Caesar, you should be satisfied.
That's all I seek; and am moreover suitor
that I may produce his body to the marketplace,
and in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
speak in the order of his funeral.
You shall, Mark Antony.
Brutus, a word with you.
You know not what you do.
Do not consent that Antony speak in his funeral.
Know you how much the people may be moved
by that he will utter?
By your pardon, I will myself into the pulpit first,
and show the reason of our Caesar's death.
What Antony shall speak,
I will protest he speaks by leave and by permission,
and that we are contented Caesar shall have
all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
I know not what may fall; I like it not.
Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body.
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
but speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
and say you do't by our permission,
else shall you not have any hand at all about his funeral.
and you shall speak in the same pulpit whereto I am going,
after my speech is ended.
Be it so, I do desire no more.
Prepare the body then, and follow us.
O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
that I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
that ever lived in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed his costly blood.
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,
which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
to beg the voice and utterance of my tongue.
A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
domestic fury and fierce civil strife
shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
blood and destruction shall be so in use,
and dreadful objects so familiar,
that mothers shall but smile
when they behold their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;
all pity choked with custom of fell deeds,
and Caesar's spirit ranging for revenge,
with Ate by his side come hot from hell,
shall in these confines with a monarch's voice cry "havoc!"
And let slip the dogs of war,
that this foul deed shall smell above the earth
with carrion men, groaning for burial.
You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
I do, Mark Antony.
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
He did receive his letters, and is coming,
and bid me say to you by word of mouth--
O Caesar!
Thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine, began to water.
Is thy master coming?
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
Post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced.
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
no Rome of safety for Octavius yet;
hie hence, and tell him so.
Yet stay awhile, thou shalt not back
till I have borne this corpse into the marketplace.
There shall I try, in my oration,
how the people take the cruel issue of these bloody men,
according to the which thou shalt discourse
to young Octavius of the state of things.
Then follow me and give me audience, friends!
Cassius, go you into the other street and part the numbers.
Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
and public reasons shall be rendered Of Caesar's death.
Be patient till the last!
Romans, countrymen, and lovers.
Hear me for my cause, and be silent, that you may hear.
Believe me for mine honor,
and have respect to mine honor, that you may believe.
Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses,
that you may the better judge.
If there be any in this assembly,
any dear friend of Caesar's, to him I say
that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his.
If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar,
this is my answer: not that I loved Caesar less,
but that I loved Rome more.
Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves,
than that Caesar were dead to live all freemen?
As Caesar loved me, I weep for him;
as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it;
as he was valiant, I honor him;
but as he was ambitious, I slew him!
There is tears for his love, joy for his fortune,
honor for his valor, and death for his ambition.
Who is here so base that would be a bondman?
If any, speak, for him have I offended.
Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman?
Who is here so vile that will not love his country?
If any, speak, for him have I offended.
I pause for a reply.
None, Brutus, none.
Then none have I offended.
I have done no more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus.
The question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol,
his glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy,
nor his offenses enforced, for which he suffered death.
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony,
who, though he had no hand in his death,
shall receive the benefit of his dying,
a place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not?
With this I depart--
that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome,
I have the same dagger for myself,
when it shall please my country to need my death.
Live!
Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
and, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
Do grace to Caesar's corpse,
and grace his speech tending to Caesar's glories,
which Mark Antony, by our permission, is allow'd to make.
I do entreat you, not a man depart, save I alone,
till Antony have spoke.
Let him go in the public chair; we will hear him.
Noble Antony, go up.
For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.
What does he say of Brutus?
He says, for Brutus' sake,
he' beholding to us all.
'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
This Caesar was a tyrant!
Nay, that's certain.
We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
You gentle Romans--
Peace, ho!
Friends, Romans, countrymen...
lend me your ears!
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them,
the good is oft interred with their bones;
so let it be with Caesar.
The noble Brutus hath told you Caesar was ambitious;
if it were so, it was a grievous fault,
and grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest--
for Brutus is an honorable man; so are they all,
all honorable men.
Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
but Brutus says he was ambitious,
and Brutus is an honorable man!
He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
and Brutus is an honorable man.
You all did see
that on the Lupercal I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
which he did thrice refuse.
Was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
and sure he is an honorable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
but here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause;
what cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
and men have lost their reason.
Bear with me; my heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
and I must pause till it come back to me.
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar has had great wrong.
Has he, masters?
I fear there will a worse come in his place.
He would not take the crown;
therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
Ah, poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
Now mark him, he begins again to speak.
But yesterday the word of Caesar
might have stood against the world.
Now lies he there, and none so poor to do him reverence.
O masters!
If I were disposed
to stir your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
who, you all know, are honorable men.
I will not do them wrong; I rather choose to wrong the dead,
to wrong myself and you, than I will wrong such honorable men.
But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;
I found it in his closet, 'tis his will.
Let but the commons hear this testament--
which, pardon me, I do not mean to read--
and they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
and dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
yea, beg a hair of him for memory, and, dying,
mention it within their wills,
bequeathing it as a rich legacy unto their issue.
Will you be patient?
Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
it is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
and, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
it will inflame you, it will make you mad.
'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
for if you should, O, what would come of it!
Will you be patient?
Will you stay awhile?
I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it.
I fear I wrong the honorable men
whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar; I do fear it.
They were traitors! Honorable men?
The will! The will!
The will!
You will compel me then to read the will?
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
that I may show you him that made the will.
Shall I descend, and will you give me leave?
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle.
I remember the first time ever Caesar put it on;
'twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
that day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through;
see what a rent the envious Casca made;
through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;
and as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
as rushing out of doors,
to be resolved if Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
for Brutus, you all know, was Caesar's angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him.
This was the most unkindest cut of all;
for when the noble Caesar saw him stab, ingratitude,
more strong than traitors' arms, quite vanquish'd him.
Then burst his mighty heart,
and, in his mantle muffling up his face,
even at the base of Pompey's statue,
which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell!
What a fall was there, my countrymen.
Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.
O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel the dint of pity.
These are gracious drops.
Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
our Caesar's vesture wounded?
Look you here, here is himself,
marr'd, as you see, with traitors!
Oh!
- O piteous spectacle. - O noble Caesar.
Woeful day.
Villains. Traitors.
O most bloody sight!
We will be revenged!
Good friends, sweet friends,
let me not stir you up to such a sudden flood of mutiny.
They that have done this deed are honorable.
What private griefs they have,
alas, I know not, that made them do it,
but they are wise and honorable,
and will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
I am no orator, as Brutus is; but, as you know me all,
a plain blunt man, that loved my friend,
and that they know full well that gave me public leave
to speak of him.
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth, action,
nor utterance, nor the power of speech, to stir men's blood.
I only speak right on;
I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor, poor dumb mouths,
and bid them speak for me!
But were I Brutus, and Brutus Antony,
there were an Antony would ruffle up your spirits
and put a tongue in every wound of Caesar's
that should move the stones of Rome to rise and mutiny!
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
You have forgot the will I told you of.
Here is the will, and under seal of Caesar.
To every Roman citizen...
he gives seventy-five drachmas.
Hear me with patience.
Moreover, he hath left you all his walks, his private arbors,
and new-planted orchards, on this side Tiber;
he hath left them you, and to your heirs forever--
common pleasures, to walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
Here was a Caesar!
When comes such another?
Never! Never!
Now let it work.
Mischief, thou art afoot, take thou what course thou wilt.
How now, fellow?
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
Where is he?
He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.
And thither will I straight to visit him.
He comes upon a wish.
Fortune is merry, and in this mood will give us anything.
I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
Be like they had some notice of the people,
how I had moved them.
Come, bring me to Octavius.
I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
and things unluckily charge my fantasy.
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
yet something leads me forth.
What is your name?
Whither are you going?
Where do you dwell?
Are you a married man or a bachelor?
Answer every man directly.
Ay, and briefly.
Ay, and wisely.
Ay, and truly, you were best.
What is my name?
Whither am I going?
Where do I dwell?
Am I a married man or a bachelor?
Hmm, then, to answer every man directly and briefly,
wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.
That's as much as to say they are fools that marry.
You'll bear me a bang for that, I fear.
Proceed directly.
Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral.
As a friend or an enemy?
As a friend.
That matter is answered directly.
For your dwelling, briefly.
Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
Your name, sir, truly.
Truly, my name is Cinna.
Tear him to pieces; he's a conspirator!
I'm Cinna the poet! I'm Cinna the poet!
Tear him for his bad verses! Tear him for his bad verses!
I am not Cinna the conspirator!
It is no matter, his name's Cinna.
Pluck but his name out of his heart, and turn him going.
Tear him! Tear him!
Tear him!
This many then shall die.
Their names are prick'd.
Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?
I do consent--
Prick him down, Antony.
Upon condition Publius shall not live,
who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.
He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house, fetch the will hither,
and we shall determine how to cut off some charge in legacies.
What, shall I find you here?
Or here, or at the Capitol.
This is a slight unmeritable man, meet to be sent on errands.
Is it fit, the three-fold world divided,
he should stand one of the three to share it?
So you thought him,
and took his voice who should be prick'd to die
in our black sentence and proscription.
Octavius, I have seen more days than you,
and though we lay these honors on this man
to ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,
he shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
to groan and sweat under the business,
either led or driven, as we point the way;
and having brought our treasure where we will,
then take we down his load and turn him off,
like to the empty ass, to shake his ears and graze in commons.
You may do your will, but he's a tried and valiant soldier.
So is my horse, Octavius,
and for that I do appoint him store of provender?
It is a creature that I teach to fight, to wind,
to stop, to run directly on,
and, in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
he must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;
a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds on objects, arts,
and imitations, which, out of use and staled by other men,
begin his fashion.
Do not talk of him but as a property.
Now, Octavius...
listen great things.
Brutus and Cassius are levying powers;
we must straight make head;
therefore let our alliance be combined,
our best friends made, our means stretch'd;
and let us presently go sit in council,
how covert matters may be best disclosed,
and open perils surest answered.
Let us do so, for we are at the stake,
and bay'd about with many enemies;
and some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
millions of mischiefs.
What now, Lucilius, is Cassius near?
He is at hand,
and Pindarus is come to do you salutation from his master.
He greets me well.
Your master, Pindarus, in his own change, or by ill officers,
hath given me some worthy cause to wish things done undone;
but if he be at hand, I shall be satisfied.
I do not doubt but that my noble master
will appear such as he is, full of regard and honor.
He is not doubted.
A word, Lucilius.
How he received you?
Let me be resolved.
With courtesy and with respect enough,
but not with such familiar instances,
nor with such free and friendly conference,
as he hath used of old.
Thou hast described a hot friend cooling.
Ever note, Lucilius, when love begins to sicken and decay
it useth an enforced ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
but hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
make gallant show and promise of their mettle;
but when they should endure the bloody spur,
they fall their crests and like deceitful jades
sink in the trial.
Comes his army on?
They meant his night in Sard is to be quarter'd;
the greater part, the horse in general,
are come with Cassius.
Hark, he is arrived.
March gently on to meet him.
Stand, ho.
Speak the word along.
Stand ho!
Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
Judge me, you gods.
Wrong I mine enemies?
And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
and when you do them--
Cassius, be content, speak your griefs softly,
I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our armies here,
which should perceive nothing but love from us,
let us not wrangle.
Bid them move away; then in my tent, Cassius,
enlarge your griefs, and I will give you audience.
Pindarus, bid our commanders lead their charges
off a little from this ground.
Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man come to our tent
till we have done our conference.
Lucius and Titinius, guard our door.
That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
you have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella
for taking bribes here of the Sardians,
wherein my letters, praying on his side,
because I knew the man, were slighted off.
You wrong'd yourself to write in such a case.
In such a time as this it is not meet
that every nice offense should bear his comment.
Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself are much condemn'd
to have an itching palm,
to sell and mart your offices for gold to undeservers.
I an itching palm?
You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
and chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
Chastisement?
Remember March, the ides of March remember.
Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
What villain touch'd his body,
that did stab, and not for justice?
What, shall one of us,
that struck the foremost man of all this world
but for supporting robbers,
shall we now contaminate our fingers with base bribes
and sell the mighty space of our large honors
for so much trash as may be grasped thus?
By the gods, I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
than such a Roman.
Brutus, bait not me, I'll not endure it.
You forget yourself to hedge me in.
I am a soldier, I, older in practice,
abler than yourself to make conditions.
Go to, you are not, Cassius.
I am.
I say you are not.
Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.
Away, slight man.
Is't possible?
Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
O gods, ye gods!
Must I endure all this?
All this?
Ay, more!
Fret till your proud heart break.
Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
and make your bondmen tremble.
Must I bouge?
Must I observe you?
Must I stand and crouch under your testy humor?
By the gods, you shall digest the venom of your spleen,
though it do split you, for, from this day forth,
I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
when you are waspish.
Is it come to this?
You say you are the better soldier:
let it appear so, make your vaunting true,
and it shall please me well.
For mine own part, I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
I said, an elder soldier, not a better.
Did I say "better"?
If you did, I care not.
When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
Peace, peace.
You durst not so have tempted him.
I durst not?
No.
What, durst not tempt him?
For your life you durst not.
Do not presume too much upon my love;
I may do that I shall be sorry for.
You have done that you should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
for I am arm'd so strong in honesty,
that they pass by me as the idle wind
which I respect not.
I did send to you for certain sums of gold,
which you denied me, for I can raise no money by vile means.
By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
and drop my blood for drachmas
than to wring from the hard hands of peasants
their vile trash by any indirection.
I did send to you for gold to pay my legions,
which you denied me.
Was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
to lock such rascal counters from his friends,
be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
Dash him to pieces.
I denied you not.
You did!
I did not!
He was but a fool that brought my answer back.
Brutus hath rived my heart.
A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
but Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
I do not, till you practise them on me.
You love me not.
I do not like your faults.
A friendly eye could never see such faults.
A flatterer's would not,
though they do appear as huge as high Olympus.
Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
for Cassius is aweary of the world:
hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
set in a notebook, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
to cast into my teeth.
O, I could weep my spirit from mine eyes!
There is my dagger, and here my naked breast;
within, a heart dearer than Pluto's mine, richer than gold.
If that thou beest a Roman, take it forth;
I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
Strike, as thou didst at Caesar!
For I know, when thou didst hate him worst,
thou lovedst him better than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
Sheathe your dagger.
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,
that carries anger as the flint bears fire,
who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark
and straight is cold again.
Hath Cassius lived
to be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
when grief and blood ill-temper'd vexeth him?
When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.
Do you confess so much?
Give me your hand.
And my heart too.
O Brutus.
What's the matter?
Have not you love enough to bear with me
when that rash humor which my mother gave me
makes me forgetful?
Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth,
when you are overearnest with your Brutus,
he'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
Let me go in to see the generals.
There is some grudge between 'em,
'tis not meet they be alone.
You shall not come to them.
Nothing but death shall stay me.
How now, what's the matter?
For shame, you generals.
What do you mean?
Love, and be friends, as two such men should be;
for I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.
How vilely doth this cynic rhyme.
Get you hence, saucy fellow, hence.
Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis his fashion.
I'll know his humor when he knows his time.
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
Companion, hence.
Away, away, be gone.
Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
And come yourselves
and bring Messala with you immediately to us.
Lucius, a bowl of wine.
I did not think you could have been so angry.
O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
Of your philosophy you make no use,
if you give place to accidental evils.
No one bears sorrow better.
Portia is dead.
Portia?
She is dead.
How 'scaped I killing when I cross'd you so?
O insupportable and touching loss.
Upon what sickness?
Impatient of my absence, and grief that young Octavius
with Mark Antony have made themselves so strong--
for with her death that tidings came--
with this she fell distract, and, her attendants absent,
swallow'd fire.
And died so?
Even so.
O ye immortal gods.
Speak no more of her.
Give me a bowl of wine.
In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.
My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.
Come in, Titinius.
Welcome, good Messala.
Now sit we close about this taper here,
and call in question our necessities.
Portia, art thou gone?
No more, I pray you.
Messala, I have here received letters that young Octavius
with Mark Antony come down upon us with a mighty power,
bending their expedition toward Philippi.
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.
With what addition?
That by proscription and bills of outlawry
Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
have put to death an hundred senators.
Therein our letters do not well agree;
mine speak of seventy senators
that died by their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
Cicero one?
Cicero is dead, and by that order of proscription.
Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
No, Messala.
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
Nothing, Messala.
That, methinks, is strange.
Why ask you?
Hear you aught of her in yours?
No, my lord.
Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:
for certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
Why, farewell, Portia.
We must die, Messala.
With meditating that she must die once
I have the patience to endure it now.
Even so great men great losses should endure.
I have as much of this in art as you,
but yet my nature could not bear it so.
Well, to our work alive.
What do you think of marching to Philippi presently?
I do not think it good.
Your reason?
This it is: 'tis better the enemy seek us;
so shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
doing himself offense, whilst we lying still are full of rest,
defense, and nimbleness.
Good reasons must of force give place to better.
The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
do stand but in a forced affection,
for they have grudged us contribution.
The enemy, marching along by them,
by them shall make a fuller number up,
come on refresh'd, new-added, and encouraged;
from which advantage shall we cut him off
if at Philippi we do face him there,
these people at our back.
- Hear me, good brother. - Under your pardon.
You must note beside
that we have tried the utmost of our friends,
our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe:
the enemy increaseth every day;
we, at the height, are ready to decline.
There is a tide in the affairs of men
which taken at the flood leads on to fortune;
omitted, all the voyage of their life
is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
and we must take the current when it serves,
or lose our ventures.
Then, with your will, go on;
we'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
and nature must obey necessity,
which we will niggard with a little rest.
There is no more to say?
No more.
Good night.
Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
Farewell, good Messala; good night, Titinius;
Good night, lord Brutus.
Good night, Lord Brutus.
Noble, noble Cassius, good night and good repose.
O my dear brother.
This was an ill beginning of the night.
Never come such division 'tween our souls.
Let it not, Brutus.
Everything is well.
Good night, my lord.
Good night, good brother.
Give me the gown.
Where is thy instrument?
Here in the tent.
What, thou speak'st drowsily?
Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'erwatch'd.
Call Claudius and some other of my men,
I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
Varro and Claudius.
Calls my lord?
I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
it may be I shall raise you by and by
on business to my brother Cassius.
So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
I will not have it so.
Lie down, good sirs.
It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
Look Lucius, here's the book I sought for so;
I put it in the pocket of my gown.
I was sure your lordship did not give it me.
Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
and touch thy instrument a strain or two?
Ay, my lord, an't please you.
It does, my boy.
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
It is my duty, sir.
I should not urge thy duty past thy might;
I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
I have slept, my lord, already.
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
I will not hold thee long.
If I do live, I will be good to thee.
This is a sleepy tune.
O murtherous slumber,
layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy that plays thee music?
Gentle knave, good night.
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument;
I'll take it from thee.
And, good boy, good night.
Let me see, let me see;
is not the leaf turn'd down where I left reading?
Here it is, I think.
How ill this taper burns.
Who comes here?
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
that shapes this monstrous apparition.
It comes upon me.
Art thou anything?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil
that makest my blood cold and my hair to stare?
Speak to me what thou art.
Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
Why comest thou?
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
Well, then I shall see thee again?
Ay, at Philippi.
Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.
Now I have taken heart thou vanishest.
Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
Boy. Lucius.
Varro. Claudius.
Sirs, awake.
Claudius!
The strings, my lord, are false.
He thinks he still is at his instrument.
Lucius, awake.
My lord?
Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
Yes, that thou didst.
Didst thou see anything?
Nothing, my lord.
Sleep again, Lucius.
Sirrah Claudius.
Fellow thou, awake.
My lord?
Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
- Did we, my lord? - Did we, my lord?
Ay, saw you anything?
No, my lord, I saw nothing.
Nor I, my lord.
Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
bid him set on his powers betimes before,
and we will follow.
It shall be done, my lord.
Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
You said the enemy would not come down,
but keep the hills and upper regions.
It proves not so.
Their battles are at hand;
they mean to warn us at Philippi here,
answering before we do demand of them.
Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know wherefore they do it.
They could be content to visit other places,
and come down with fearful bravery,
thinking by this face to fasten in our thoughts
that they have courage; but 'tis not so.
Prepare you, generals.
The enemy comes on in gallant show;
their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
and something to be done immediately.
Octavius, lead your battle softly on,
upon the left hand of the even field.
Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left.
Why do you cross me in this exigent?
I do not cross you, but I will do so.
They stand, and would have parley.
Stand fast, Titinius; we must out and talk.
Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?
No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
Make forth, the generals would have some words.
Stir not until the signal.
Words before blows.
Is it so, countrymen?
Not that we love words better, as you do.
Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.
Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
crying, "Long live. Hail, Caesar."
Antony, the posture of your blows are yet unknown;
but for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
and leave them honeyless.
Not stingless too.
O, yes, and soundless too, for you have stol'n their buzzing,
Antony, and very wisely threat before you sting.
Villains, you did not so when your vile daggers
hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar.
You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
and bow'd like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet;
whilst damned Casca, like a cur,
behind struck Caesar on the neck.
O you flatterers!
Flatterers?
Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
This tongue had not offended so today,
if Cassius might have ruled.
Come, come, the cause.
If arguing make us sweat,
the proof of it will turn to redder drops.
Look, I draw a sword against conspirators;
when think you that the sword goes up again?
Never, till Caesar's three and twenty wounds be well avenged,
or till another Caesar
have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,
unless thou bring'st them with thee.
So I hope, I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.
O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain, young man,
thou couldst not die more honorable.
A peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
join'd with a masker and a reveler.
Old Cassius still.
Come, Antony, away.
Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
If you dare fight today, come to the field;
if not, when you have stomachs.
Messala.
What says my general?
Messala...
this is my birthday.
At this very day was Cassius born.
Give me thy hand, Messala.
Be thou my witness that, against my will, as Pompey was,
am I compell'd to set upon one battle all our liberties.
You know that I held Epicurus strong, and his opinion.
Now I change my mind, and partly credit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis,
upon our former ensign two mighty eagles fell,
and there they perch'd,
gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
who to Philippi here consorted us.
This morning are they fled away and gone,
and in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
fly o'er our heads
and downward look on us, as we were sickly prey.
Their shadows seem a canopy most fatal,
under which our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
Believe not so.
I but believe it partly, for I am fresh of spirit
and resolved to meet all perils very constantly.
Now, most noble Brutus,
the gods today stand friendly that we may,
lovers in peace, lead on our days to age.
But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
let's reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this battle, then is this the last time
that you and I will speak together?
What are you then determined to do?
Even by the rule of that philosophy by which
I did blame Cato for the death which he did give himself--
I know not how, but I do find it cowardly and vile,
for fear of what might fall, so to prevent the time of life--
arming myself with patience to stay the providence
of some high powers that govern us below.
Then, if we do lose this battle,
you are contented to be led in triumph
through the streets of Rome?
No, Cassius, no.
Think not, thou noble Roman,
that ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
he bears too great a mind.
But this same day must end that work the ides of March begun.
And whether we shall meet again I know not.
Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
Forever and forever farewell, Cassius.
If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.
Forever and forever farewell, Brutus.
If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
if not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
Why then, lead on.
O, that a man might know
the end of this day's business ere it come.
But it sufficeth that the day will end,
and then the end is known.
Ride, ride, Messala, ride,
and give these bills unto the legions on the other side.
Let them set on at once,
for I perceive but cold demeanor in Octavia's wing,
and sudden push gives them the overthrow.
Ride, ride, Messala!
Let them all come down!
O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly.
Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.
This ensign here of mine was turning back;
I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
who, having some advantage on Octavius, took it too eagerly.
His soldiers fell to spoil,
whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.
Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord;
Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
This hill is far enough.
Look, look, Titinius:
are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
They are, my lord.
Titinius, if thou lovest me,
mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
till he have brought thee up to yonder troops and here again,
that I may rest assured whether yond troops be friend or enemy.
I will be here again, even with a thought.
Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill;
my sight was ever thick; regard Titinius,
and tell me what thou notest about the field.
This day I breathed first: time is come round,
and where I did begin, there shall I end;
my life is run his compass.
Sirrah, what news?
O my lord!
What news?
Titinius is enclosed round about with horsemen,
that make to him on the spur; yet he spurs on!
Now they are almost on him!
Now, Titinius!
Now some light.
O, he lights too.
He's ta'en.
And, hark.
They shout for joy.
Come down; behold no more.
O, coward that I am, to live so long,
to see my best friend ta'en before my face.
Come hither, Sirrah.
In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
and then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
that whatsoever I did bidst thee do,
thou shouldst attempt it.
Come now, keep thine oath;
now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
that ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.
Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
and when my face is cover'd...
as 'tis now, guide thou the sword.
Caesar...
thou art...
even with the sword that kill'd thee.
So, I am free,
yet would not so have been, durst I have done my will.
O Cassius.
Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
where never Roman shall take note of him.
It is but change, Titinius,
for Octavius is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
as Cassius' legions are by Antony.
Then these tidings would well comfort Cassius.
Where did you leave him?
All disconsolate, with Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
He lies not like the living.
O my heart.
Is not that he?
No, this was he, Messala, but Cassius is no more.
O setting sun, as in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
so in his red blood does Cassius' day set,
the sun of Rome is set.
Our day is gone; clouds, dews, and dangers come;
our deeds are done.
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
O hateful error, melancholy's child,
why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
the things that are not?
O error, soon conceived, thou never comest unto a happy birth,
but kill'st the mother that engender'd thee.
What, Pindarus!
Where art thou, Pindarus?
Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet the noble Brutus,
thrusting this report into his ears.
I may say "thrusting" it,
for piercing steel and darts envenomed
shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
as tidings of this sight.
Hie you, Messala.
I will seek for Pindarus the while.
Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy friends?
And did not they put on my brow this wreath of victory,
and bid me give it thee?
Didst thou not hear their shouts?
Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything.
But, hold thee,
take thou this garland on thy brow;
thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I will do his bidding.
Brutus, come apace, and see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
By your leave, gods, this is a Roman's part.
Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.
Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
Titinius' face is upward.
He is slain.
O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet.
Thy spirit walks abroad,
and turns our swords in our own proper entrails.
Brave Titinius.
Look whe'er he have not crown'd dead Cassius.
Are yet two Romans living such as these?
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well.
It is impossible that Rome should ever breed thy fellow.
Friends, I owe more tears to this dead man
than you shall ever see me pay.
I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body;
his funerals shall not be in our camp, lest it discomfort us.
Lucilius, come, and come, young Cato; let us to the field.
Labio and Flavios, set our battles on.
'Tis three o'clock, and Romans, yet ere night
we shall try fortune in a second fight.
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
What bastard doth not?
Who will go with me?
I will proclaim my name about the field.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend.
I am the son of Marcus Cato!
And I am Brutus!
Marcus Brutus, I!
Brutus, my country's friend; know me for Brutus.
O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
and mayst be honor'd, being Cato's son.
Yield, or thou diest.
Only I yield to die.
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight:
kill Brutus, and be honor'd in his death.
We must not.
A noble prisoner.
Room, ho!
Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.
I'll tell the news.
Here comes the general.
Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
Where is he?
Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.
I dare assure thee that no enemy
shall ever take alive the noble Brutus;
the gods defend him from so great a shame.
When you do find him, or alive or dead,
he will be found like Brutus, like himself.
This is not Brutus, friends,
but, I assure you, a prize no less in worth.
Keep this man safe, give him all kindness;
I had rather have such men my friends than enemies.
Go on, and see whether Brutus be alive or dead,
and bring us word unto Octavius' tent
how everything is chanced.
Come hither, poor remains of friends, rest here.
Statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord, he came not back.
He is or ta'en or slain.
Sit thee down, Clitus.
Slaying is the word: it is a deed in fashion.
Hark thee, Clitus.
What, I, my lord?
No, not for all the world.
Peace then, no word.
I'd rather kill myself.
Hark thee, Dardanius.
Shall I do such a deed?
O Dardanius.
O Clitus.
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
To kill him, Clitus.
Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
that it runs over even at his eyes.
Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.
What says my lord?
Why, this, Volumnius: the ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to me
two several times by night;
at Sardis once, and this last night here in Philippi fields.
I know my hour is come.
Not so, my lord.
Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
our enemies have beat us to the pit;
It is more worthy that we should leap in ourselves
than tarry till they push us.
Good Volumnius,
thou know'st that we two went to school together;
even for that our love of old, I prithee,
Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.
That's not an office for a friend, my lord.
Fly, my lord, fly, there is no tarrying here.
Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius.
Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
farewell to thee too, Strato.
Countrymen, my heart doth joy
that yet in all my life I found no man but he was true to me.
I shall have glory by this losing day,
more than Octavius and Mark Antony
by this vile conquest shall attain unto.
So, fare you well at once,
for Brutus' tongue hath almost ended his life's history.
Night hangs upon mine eyes,
my bones would rest that have but labor'd
to attain this hour.
Fly, my lord, fly.
Hence, I will follow.
I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
while I do run upon it.
Wilt thou, Strato?
Give me your hand first.
Fare you well, my lord.
Farewell, good Strato.
Caesar, now be still;
I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.
What man is that?
My master's man.
Strato, where is thy master?
Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
the conquerors can but make a fire of him;
for Brutus only overcame himself,
and no man else hath honor by his death.
So Brutus should be found.
I thank thee, Brutus,
that thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.
All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
Do so, good Messala.
How died my master, Strato?
I held the sword, and he did run on it.
Octavius, then take him to follow thee
that did the latest service to my master.
This was the noblest Roman of them all.
All the conspirators, save only he,
did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
he only, in a general honest thought and common good to all,
made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the elements so mix'd in him
that Nature might stand up and say to all the world,
"This was a man."
According to his virtue
let us use him with all respect and rites of burial.
Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
most like a soldier, ordered honorably.
So call the field to rest, and let's away,
to part the glories of this happy day.